System Design Fundamentals — Interview Revision Notes
-----------------------------------------------------

1. How URLs Work
A URL (Uniform Resource Locator) is the address of a resource on the web.
Anatomy of a URL:
https://www.example.com:443/path/to/page?id=5&sort=asc#section2

https — Protocol (how to communicate)
www.example.com — Host / domain name
:443 — Port (optional; 443 is default for HTTPS, 80 for HTTP)
/path/to/page — Path (resource location on the server)
?id=5&sort=asc — Query string (key-value parameters)
#section2 — Fragment (client-side anchor, never sent to server)

What happens when you type a URL:

Browser checks cache for DNS record
DNS lookup → resolves domain to IP
TCP connection established (+ TLS handshake for HTTPS)
HTTP request sent
Server responds → browser renders


2. How DNS Works
DNS (Domain Name System) = the internet's phone book. Converts human-readable domain names → IP addresses.
DNS Hierarchy:
Root (.) → TLD (.com, .org) → Authoritative NS (example.com) → Final IP
Resolution Steps:

Browser checks local cache → OS cache
Asks Recursive Resolver (usually your ISP or 8.8.8.8)
Resolver asks Root Name Server → points to TLD server
Resolver asks TLD Server (.com) → points to authoritative NS
Resolver asks Authoritative Name Server → returns IP
IP cached (based on TTL) and returned to browser

Key DNS Record Types:

A — domain → IPv4
AAAA — domain → IPv6
CNAME — alias to another domain
MX — mail server records
NS — name server for the domain
TTL — time to live (how long to cache)

Interview point: DNS is UDP on port 53 (fast, stateless). Falls back to TCP for large responses.

3. TCP vs UDP
Both are transport layer protocols (Layer 4).
FeatureTCPUDPConnectionConnection-oriented (3-way handshake)ConnectionlessReliabilityGuaranteed delivery, ordering, retransmissionNo guaranteesSpeedSlower (overhead)Faster (low overhead)Error checkingYesMinimal (checksum only)Use casesHTTP/S, emails, file transferDNS, video streaming, gaming, VoIP
TCP 3-Way Handshake:
Client → SYN      → Server
Client ← SYN-ACK  ← Server
Client → ACK       → Server
(Connection established)
When to use what:

Need data integrity → TCP
Need speed over perfection → UDP
Real-time apps (video calls, games) → UDP (re-sending old frames is useless)


4. HTTP vs HTTPS
HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) — application layer protocol for transferring data.

Stateless (each request is independent)
Default port 80
Data sent in plaintext ← security risk

HTTPS = HTTP + TLS encryption

Default port 443
Data is encrypted in transit
Server identity is verified via SSL/TLS certificate
Protects against: eavesdropping, man-in-the-middle attacks, tampering

HTTP Request Structure:
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.example.com
Headers...
[Body — for POST/PUT]
Common HTTP Methods: GET, POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE
Common Status Codes:

200 OK, 201 Created
301 Moved Permanently, 302 Found (redirect)
400 Bad Request, 401 Unauthorized, 403 Forbidden, 404 Not Found
500 Internal Server Error, 503 Service Unavailable


5. TLS / SSL
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) — old, now deprecated. TLS is its successor.
TLS (Transport Layer Security) — current standard. TLS 1.2 and 1.3 are used today.
What TLS provides:

Encryption — data can't be read in transit
Authentication — confirms you're talking to the real server (via certificate)
Integrity — data hasn't been tampered with

TLS Handshake (simplified, TLS 1.3):

Client → ClientHello (supported TLS versions, cipher suites)
Server → ServerHello + certificate (contains public key)
Client verifies certificate against trusted Certificate Authorities (CAs)
Key exchange → both sides derive a shared session key
Encrypted communication begins

Certificates:

Issued by Certificate Authorities (CAs) like DigiCert, Let's Encrypt
Contains: domain name, public key, expiry, CA signature
Browser has a built-in list of trusted CAs

Symmetric vs Asymmetric in TLS:

Handshake uses asymmetric crypto (public/private key) to securely exchange keys
Actual data transfer uses symmetric crypto (shared session key) — much faster


Quick Mental Map
You type URL
    ↓
DNS resolves domain → IP address
    ↓
TCP connection (3-way handshake)
    ↓
TLS handshake (if HTTPS)
    ↓
HTTP request sent over encrypted tunnel
    ↓
Server responds → browser renders
